---

layout:     post
title:    "CSS note"
subtitle:   
date:     2020-04-29
author:     "rick"
header-img: 
tags:
- Study note
---

### layout

#### Name the classes:

Block element modifier:

	1. Block: standalone component that is meaningful on its own (recipe)  (.recipe)
 	2. Element: part of a block that has no standalone meaning (img) (.recipe__img)
 	3. modifier: a different version of a block or an element (value) (.recipe__stat--value)

#### Architect

The 7-1 pattern: 7 different folders for partial Sass files, and 1 main Sass file to import all other files into a compiled CSS stylesheet.

### Unit in CSS

An example:

```
html, body{
	font-size: 16px;
	width: 80vw;
}

header{
	font-size:150%;
	padding:2em
	margin-bottom: 10rem;
	height: 90vh;
	width: 1000px;
}

.header-child{
	font-size: 3em;
	padding: 10%；
}
```

|                            | Example | How                                            | Result                             |
| -------------------------- | ------- | ---------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------- |
| %(fonts)                   | 150%    | x * parent's computed font-size                | 16px * 1.5 = 24px                  |
| %(length(padding, margin)) | 10%     | x * parent's computed **width**                | 1000px*10%=100px                   |
| em(font)                   | 3em     | x * parent's computed font-size                | 3*24px = 72px                      |
| em(length)                 | 2em     | x * **current element** computed **font-size** | 2*24px = 48px                      |
| rem                        | 10rem   | x * root computed font-size                    | 10 * 16px = 160px                  |
| vh                         | 90vh    | x% * viewport height                           | 90% of the current viewport height |
| vw                         | 80vw    | x% * viewport width                            | 80% of the current viewport width  |

#### Conclusion

Percentages are measured relative to their parent's font-size, if used to specify font-size.

Percentages are measured relative to their parent's width, if used to specify lengths.

em are measured relative to their parent font-size, if used to specify font-size.

em are measured relative to the current font-size, if used to specify lengths.

rem are always measured relative to the document's root font-size. 

#### Special case:

% for line height: 150% is 1.5 * current element computed font-size.



### Inheritance in CSS

Properties related to text are inherited: font-family, font-size, color, etc;

 The computed value of a property is what gets inherited not the declared value. (150% * 10px is inherited instead of 150% is).

Use the inherit keyword forces inheritance on some property.

### Box model in CSS

total width = right border + right padding + specified with + left padding + left border

total height = top border + top padding + specified height + bottom padding + bottom border

If we set the box-sizing to border-box, the specific height and specified width are equal to the total height and total width.

### Box type

Block-level boxes: occupy 100% of parent's width

Inline boxes: occupies only content's space, no line-breaks, no height and width can be specified, padding and margin only horizontal

Inline-block boxes: Occupies only content's space, no line breaks and there is width, height, padding and margin.

### Positioning scheme

Normal flow: default, not floated, not absolutely positioned

Floats: Element is removed from normal flow, text and inline elements will wrap around the floated element

Absolute: Element is removed from the normal flow. No impact on surrounding content or elements. Use top, bottom, left and right to offset the element from the relatively positioned container. 



### Tricks

To center something, let the top/ bottom margin be 0 and let right/ left margin auto. Then it will be in the center of its father element.

When all elements in the child element are floated, the height of the father element is zero and we need to use clearfix.

When all elements in the child elements are in absolute position, the height of the father element is auto set to be zero and we need to set a number to it by hand.

Textshadow:

border-bottom:

Define the width of the image using % as possible to make the image size normal when change the window size.